doc/blog: announce crdb (#840)
ariga/atlas: doc/website/blog/2022-06-announcing-cockroachdb-support-preview.md

---

> title: Announcing Atlas CLI v0.4.2 with preview support for CockroachDB 🪳

Author: cockroach emoji, works on the website

authors: Hedwigz
tags: [cockroachdb, integration, announcement]
image: https://blog.ariga.io/uploads/images/posts/cockroachdb/cockroachdb.png
---

Today, I'm happy to announce the release of [v0.4.2](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/releases/tag/v0.4.2) of the Atlas CLI. 
This version includes many improvements and fixes, but I wanted to share with you  exciting news about something I
personally worked on. As of v0.4.2, Atlas includes preview support for CockroachDB 🎉 

## Atlas
[Atlas](https://atlasgo.io) is an open-source project that helps developers better manage their database
schemas. It has a [CLI tool](https://atlasgo.io/cli/reference) and a
[Terraform integration](https://atlasgo.io/blog/2022/05/04/announcing-terraform-provider). By using Atlas's
Data Definition Language (with a syntax similar to Terraform), users can plan, verify and apply changes
to their databases in a simple, declarative workflow.
Earlier this year, Atlas became the [migration engine for Ent](https://entgo.io/blog/2022/01/20/announcing-new-migration-engine),

> a widely popular, Linux Foundation backed entity framework for Go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a popular, Linux Foundation backed entity framework for Go.
```

Not sure if there is something like "widley" popular. Either it is popular id it is not.

## CockroachDB
[CockroachDB](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/) is an [open-source](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach) NewSQL 
database. From their README:
> CockroachDB is a distributed SQL database built on a transactional and strongly-consistent 
> key-value store. It scales horizontally; survives disk, machine, rack, and even datacenter 
> failures with minimal latency disruption and no manual intervention; supports strongly-consistent 
> ACID transactions; and provides a familiar SQL API for structuring, manipulating, and querying data.  
  
CockroachDB has been gaining popularity and many of you [have](https://github.com/ent/ent/issues/2545)
[been](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues/785#issue-1231951038) [asking](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues/785#issuecomment-1125853135) 
for Atlas to support it.

While CockroachDB aims to be PostgreSQL compatible, it still has some incompatibilities 
(e.g. [1](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/20296#issuecomment-1066140651), 
[2](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/82064),[3](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/81659))

> which prevented Atlas users from using the existing Postgres dialect from working with it.  

Reviewer 2: thx <3

> With the latest release of Atlas, the Postgres driver automatically detects when it is connected to a CockroachDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the latest release of Atlas, the Postgres driver automatically detects if it is connected to a CockroachDB
```

database and uses a custom driver which provides compatability with CockroachDB.

### Getting started with Atlas and CockroachDB

Let's see how we can use Atlas CLI to manage the schema of a CockroachDB database. 
Start by downloading the latest version of Atlas, on macOS:
```
brew install ariga/tap/atlas
```
For installation instructions on other platforms, see [the docs](https://atlasgo.io/cli/getting-started/setting-up#install-the-cli).

For the purpose of this example, let's spin up a local, [single-node CockroachDB cluster](https://github.com/cockroachlabs-field/cockroachdb-single-node)
in a container by running:
```

> docker run -it -p 8080:8080 -p 26257:26257 -e "DATABASE_NAME=test" -e "MEMORY_SIZE=.5" timveil/cockroachdb-single-node:latest

Author: ```suggestion
docker run -it -p 8080:8080 -p 26257:26257 -e "DATABASE_NAME=test" -e "MEMORY_SIZE=.5" cockroachdb/cockroach:v21.2.11 start-single-node --insecure
```

```

Next, use Atlas's `schema inspect` command to read the schema of our local database and save the result to a file:
```
atlas schema inspect -u 'postgres://root:pass@localhost:26257/?sslmode=disable' --schema public > schema.hcl
```
Observe the current HCL representation of the `public` schema, empty with no tables:
```hcl
schema "public" {
}
```

> 

Reviewer: This seems like an unnecessary step. Once can just create the file manual in the step below, where it gets edited anyway. Inspect afterwards is cooler I think. It demonstrates more of what the tool can do.

Next, edit `schema.hcl` to add a table: 

```hcl title="schema.hcl"
schema "public" {
}

table "test" {
    column "id" {
        type = int
    }
    primary_key {
        columns = [column.id]
    }
}
```
Now apply the schema using the `schema apply` command:
```
atlas schema apply -u 'postgres://root:pass@localhost:26257/?sslmode=disable' --schema public -f schema.hcl
```
Atlas prints out the planned changes and asks for your confirmation: 
```
-- Planned Changes:
-- Create "test" table
CREATE TABLE "public"."test" ("id" integer NOT NULL, PRIMARY KEY ("id"))
Use the arrow keys to navigate: ↓ ↑ → ←
? Are you sure?:
  ▸ Apply
    Abort
```

> After hitting "Apply", Atlas connects applies our desired schema to the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After hitting "Apply", Atlas applies the desired schema to the database:
```

which prevented Atlas users from using the existing Postgres dialect from working with it.  
  
With the latest release of Atlas, the Postgres driver automatically detects if it is connected to a CockroachDB
database and uses a custom driver which provides compatability with CockroachDB.

### Getting started with Atlas and CockroachDB

Let's see how we can use Atlas CLI to manage the schema of a CockroachDB database. 
Start by downloading the latest version of Atlas, on macOS:
```
brew install ariga/tap/atlas
```
For installation instructions on other platforms, see [the docs](https://atlasgo.io/cli/getting-started/setting-up#install-the-cli).

For the purpose of this example, let's spin up a local, [single-node CockroachDB cluster](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/cockroach-start-single-node.html)
in a container by running:
```
docker run --rm -d -p 26257:26257 --name crdb cockroachdb/cockroach start-single-node --insecure
```

Next, let's seed the database with a simple table:
```
docker exec crdb cockroach sql --insecure -e 'CREATE TABLE users (id int primary key);'
```

> Next, use Atlas's `schema inspect` command to read the schema of our local database and save the result to a file:

Reviewer: Next, ... Next

  
CockroachDB has been gaining popularity and many of you [have](https://github.com/ent/ent/issues/2545) [been](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues/785#issue-1231951038) [asking](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues/785#issuecomment-1125853135) us about it.

While CockroachDB aims to be PostgreSQL compatible, it still has some incompatibilities (e.g. [1](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/20296#issuecomment-1066140651),[2](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/82064),[3](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/81659)) which prevent the naive postgres dialect from working with it. Due to this, we had to work around these issues.  
  
With the latest release of Atlas, the postgres dialect automatically detects when it is connected to CRDB and uses a custom Driver to handle that.

# How to use
## Atlas CLI

> Make sure you are using the latest version of Atlas, then connect to your CRDB as if it was Postgres, for example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure you are using the latest version of Atlas, then connect to your CockroachDB as if it were a Postgres database, for example:
```

```bash
# to save the state of 'public' schema to `schema.hcl` run:
atlas schema inspect -u "postgres://root:pass@localhost:26257/defaultdb?sslmode=disable" -s "public" > schema.hcl
```
## Ent

> If you use Ent, make sure you use the latest version, then connect to your CRDB as if it was Postgres, for example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you use Ent, make sure you use the latest version, then connect to your CockroachDB as if it were a Postgres database, for example:
```

```go
client, err := ent.Open(dialect.Postgres, "host=localhost port=26257 user=root dbname=defaultdb password=pass sslmode=disable")
if err != nil {
  log.Fatal("opening ent client", err)
}
if err := client.Schema.Create(
  context.Background(),
  schema.WithAtlas(true),
); err != nil {
  log.Fatal("opening ent client", err)
}
```

# Preview support

> The integration of Atlas with CRDB is well tested with CRDB version `v21.2.11` (at the time of writing, `latest`) and we will extend that in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The integration of Atlas with CockroachDB is well tested with version `v21.2.11` (at the time of writing, `latest`) and will be extended in the future.
```

> If you're using other versions of CRDB or looking for help, don't hesitate to [file an issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues) or join our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're using other versions of CockroachDB or looking for help, don't hesitate to [file an issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues) or join our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT).
```
